The following is an interview with Leon Wilhite,
assistant director of planning for the state of
Texas. The interview was conducted by Robert
Cornish and Kent McLemore on the 2nd of April, 1984
in Austin in the Sam Houston office building in
Leon Wilhite's office.
When did you begin your tenure with the state? I
started back in the fall of 1971 under Preston
Smith's administration. that in those days, we
had a division of planning coordination. And that
division was really into policy planning. Under
really some national initiatives under HUD 7701,
they began encouraging planning
responsibilities at the state level. And we began
seeing a number of states create offices Back in
1969 was one of the first years that there was a
division planning coordination. And Jim Ray was
not the first director of the division. That was
under Conley. But there was a director for about
two or three months before Jim Ray took over. And
Jim was one of the first directors, I think one of
the first identified directors, Shortly after
Jim Ray left and Preston Smith came on, Dan Petty
was the director in 69 under Preston Smith. And Dan
Petty had worked for Bill Pitstick in North
Central Texas Council of Governments and was very
instrumental in getting some of the early stages
of North Central planning activity started. But
under Dan Petty, the division planning
coordination really took hold. And under Preston
Smith, we began seeing some policy planning and
some coordination work done. And in fact, I think
during the 69-71 era, just before I was involved,
this office was recognized on a national basis as a
planning and coordination office, and that model
as a fairly strong planning core coordination
type agency. We got a national award at the
national level, I think, in 1970. Part of all of
that recognition came from the old Goals for Texas
program that started back in the latter part of 69,
carried it through, and was finally, I guess,
completed. It was phase one and phase two, and
those were finally completed in the latter part of
1970.
The Goals for Texas, I think, was a real good
initiative, one of the first identified
statewide planning activities. And the first
phase of it was to identify at the state level what
were the key areas. It broke down the whole
planning spectrum down into about 10 categories.
Then after phase one was drawn together, what
state agencies thought the issues and the
problems were and the goals were, they went out for
phase two. And it was a thicker, more
comprehensive effort. And I remember, Bob, in I'm
not sure what year of our planning program, when I
was a student over at Bryan College Station, we
participated in one of the committees there in
Bryan. And I remember. several people coming from
the state. And they were trying to get little
committees working. And I remember sitting on the
natural resource committee when the goals were
being established. And I really think the key
thing about the goals for Texas was it began really
talking in terms of goals and objectives and
trying to identify what they were and trying to
begin in the beginning of each one of those
documents began specifying five-year,
seven-year objectives and so on. I think it did a
great deal for beginning a planning dialogue. It
was very unfortunate that, of course, after any
governor creates something like a planning
initiative or any kind of policy initiative and
then goes out of office, that initiative tends to
die down. There was a Phase I of Goals for Texas II,
and then there was a follow-on, so-called Phase
III, which was really the budget document. It was
the first year in state government that we went to a
program-type budget, and we tried to tie the goals
and objectives identified in the Phase I and II
into the budget document itself. This was the
early days of back in 73 was the first year the state
created a zero-based budgeting concept and was
beginning to move into mandating that state
agencies develop objectives. And prior to really
71, The budget process itself strictly
identified personnel, travel, and normal
budgetary kinds of cost centers. It did not in any
way lay out budgets on a program basis. As I said
later on, zero-based budgeting came into being
and actually picked up and took it on to we now have
more of a program type budget. Phase III was an
effort to try to move us from the normal old
categorical budget to a program budget. The Goals
for Texas program, isn't it true that it was
modeled more or less after the Goals for Dallas?
That had been quite successful a few years before.
I think so. I think so. And I would think it
probably, since the Dan Petty came from Dallas and
Arlington came from North Central Texas Council
of Governments, that the idea might have spawned
from that experience. Quite frankly, during my
early days of the governor's office, I had not
heard that much about Goals for Dallas prior to
Goals for Texas. Really, Goals for Dallas had
another run at it after Goals for Texas, and it
seemed to get even more publicity later. So I did
not realize that Goals for Dallas came first, but I
understand later that it did. The Goals for Texas
program resulted in a national APA award for the
chapter, which is the only national award the
chapter has ever received. From AIP at that time?
From AIP, yeah. It was in my office, if you ever
needed it. aware of exactly what role AIP did play
at that time. I don't know that John Shanahan
played a role because John was down here during the
time that was going on, but John was not in the
Division of Planning and Coordination per se, but
he was in the Office of State-Local Relations,
which was a division in the Governor's office. But
obviously Did AIP play a role or iChapter play a
role in setting up Golds for Texas? I think that our
chapter probably just simply provide a nurturing
role. But if the truth be known, the award probably
should have gone to the governor's office rather
than chapter. Well, we got awards. I think HUD
wound up, because of Obviously, they helped fund
some of the earlier work. And they were real proud
of it, I'm sure. And we got an award there. And I'm
not sure. I think the National Association of
Regional Councils also gave us an award on that. So
there were several awards. But I think the goal for
Texas was. That might be a good thing to document
precisely so that we can put that in. Which
different groups' awards? You know, that could
possibly be documented. I'm not sure I can.
There's several. There's one here. You might stop
it if you want to. It's part of a golden age. Yeah. I
think one key thing about Goals for Texas was that
while regional councils were still being
organized, regional planning commissions were
still being organized in Texas, In fact, the last
one was organized out at Midland-Odessa in 1971.
So you can tell Goldford, Texas ended in 70, the end
of 70. But most of the regional councils that were
organized at that time, that was a very early
agenda item that the governor had asked regional
councils to help informalize it. Bragg's Valley
Development Council, when I was a student, was the
instrument to help organize and get the local
input and the committees set up and all that. Many
of the councils of government had just been
transformed from the old EDDs, Economic
Development Divisions or whatever, into
councils of governments. Economic Development
Districts were formed back in early years. I'm not
sure when the first one was formed, but In the
latter 60s and then early 70s, we began trying to,
as a policy of the governor, in fact, Governor
Smith, we began folding regional, really the
districts into regional councils and trying to
merge them. There's still two or three that still
exist. Even after we pressed a lot trying to force
them into one organization, there's still two or
three that currently exist. Brazos Valley
Development Council was one example of a district
that became the regional council of Brazos Valley
Development Council. What is the status of the
regional planning areas now that are focused
around COGS? The state's been divided into
planning regions. Are those still existing? Yes.
State planning regions still exist. The last time
that we've had a county change was 1973. We've been
laboring extensively trying to keep those
regions somewhat consistent and sacred,
although we review the boundaries every two years
under law. We have tried to encourage that they
stay the same, and we try to use the regions. Each 24
of the 24 regions are multiples thereof in
planning activities. So we've seen for planning,
and then many agencies are trying to use the
regions as best they can for operational
purposes, program operations. Most of the human
service type agencies are finding that They need
anywhere from 10 to 12 regions rather than 24, so
they make combinations thereof. But we've
continued over 10 or 12 years to push for the
geographic framework so that, you know, Texas has
254 counties and is extremely diverse and over
3,000 cities and various and sundry kinds of
cities. And it's almost mandated that we look at
some multiples of all of those to be able to handle
any kind of activity. So state-planning regions
are still a vehicle we're using. Conley formed the
regions initially in 1968 after a consultant
study. They tried to form regions where you had A
metropolitan area, primarily one of the first
things we looked for was an SMSA. And then we tried
to align counties that were naturally drawn to
that metropolitan area, both economically,
geographically. And there were about nine
specific criteria used to determine where a
county would be aligned. And our studies every two
years have tried to reiterate those criteria to
determine where it would go. We've had counties
officially request movement. We've had to go out
and meet with the counties and cities and
citizenry. And to really go through that criteria
with them, we find that usually those things,
after they're all settled down, everybody feels
like they're aligned about right. So it was all
based on a 68 study. Conley started it. under
Preston Smith, policy development in regard to
playing regions became a fairly major issue. We
moved into some fairly heavy-handed positions of
mandating that counties move here and there and
that state agencies shall use. During the years
from 71 through Briscoe administration, the
playing regions were intact, but not forcefully
implemented. State agencies began drifting away
and doing other kinds of things. But planning
regions stayed intact since that time, since
really 68. And the only major change, the last
major change, was in 73. So I think we do have the
geographic framework for our planning and state
agencies Right now, I guess, if you drew a bottom
line, try to use them, although we've got issues
like river authorities. The water agency, for
example, has a hard time using planning regions
because river basins do not really recognize
political boundaries. When you're dealing with
water issues, basically, Bob's an expert in that.
you really do not do well by trying to go off of
political boundaries for that basis. So we've
struggled a little bit with those kinds of issues,
how you deal with environmental concerns that
really do not recognize boundaries. But we're
dealing with a big one right now with Canada, for
example, on acid rain that doesn't recognize an
international boundary, for example. Well,
okay, on the state planning reasons,
could you give us
the benefit of your experience with the Smith
administration and the sort of thing that
Governor Smith was attempting to establish for
the state's role in planning and how that came
about and who the principal players were in all of
that? I think, as
I mentioned, Gold for Texas was one keynote. I
think the latter part of the Smith
administration, in fact, just before losing the
election, and then by January after, in the
process of leaving, there were a number of
documents published that were really And we look
back on those documents as being now some real
valuable cornerstones, if you will. There were a
number of planning policies established,
policies about economic development districts
moving from districts doing their own thing to
being a part of the regular planning system. Those
documents were policies that if If Smith had been
around for a while and the players as they were at
that time, we would have seen, we would have for
sure not seen three economic development
districts floating around out there by
themselves right now. There were just a lot of
those kinds of things that were being forced at
that time. Ed Grisham was the director of the
division planning coordination at that time.
under Preston Smith, and I would think would have
to be identified as a key person. After Dan Petty
moved over to the governor's executive assistant
position, he handpicked Ed Grisham. And Ed, Bob, I
mentioned Ed as being the new chairman of the Texas
Employment Commission over now. But Ed was a very,
in fact, Ed was the point guy for Dan Petty on the
Goals for Texas program. He was the staffer. that
did a lot of the nuts and bolts work. Where did Ed
come from? Ed was a Texan, and somewhere sort of
west, central Texas somewhere, I'm not sure, the
little town, but had gone to school out of sort of
the landscape program, I think, out at Texas Tech.
and had worked for the Department of Agriculture
within Washington for some time. I'm not sure, a
short time. He was a young guy. When he was a
director here, he was about 32. And so he was still
young and had a lot of vinegar. And Ed was the
director. Another key actor in that division was
Walter Tibbetts, as I mentioned to you, is now back
as a part of the governor's staff. And Walter was
the person that hired me and was involved in hiring
several people that really carried the office
from about 71 through probably around 74 or 75.
There were quite a few of our people that carried
quite a bit of initiatives and so on. Up to my
hiring. There had never been anybody with any kind
of planning degree. Most everybody in this office
was a public administrator, a government major,
and even Ed Grisham, while having a landscape type
background, was not out of a planning program. And
in 71, I was hired by a guy named Tony Briard that
came out the University of Texas Planning School.
We were the two that were hired in 1971, sort of the
first so-called graduated, educated planner
types. And it was sort of interesting. While they
were getting these national awards from planning
organizations and all that, they were all saying,
but we're not planners. I want you to make sure that
you understand that we appreciate the planning
principles, but we're not planners. And I
remember Dan Petty always referring to planner
types and planners, but he was always the one that
was really pushing setting up goals, programs,
and so forth. Most everybody had the concept of a
planner being a street grid system layout person
that really did very structural planning
activities. They really didn't view planning as a
process where, really, decisions are made. And I
think that's been my song throughout day one, is
that planning is just a structured
decision-making process. And that during the
middle 70s, I'll just say to you that planning was
viewed as land use planning. When you said
planning, you meant regulating land and its use.
And during that period of time, that was a no-no,
very much a no-no. And so even people started
dropping the planning name. They were very
fearful of turning folks off from planning. And I
continually, throughout those periods of time,
tried to get people to view planning as a process.
And as laying the options out to the governor, we
can make a good decision. And that's what planning
is all about, and trying to transcend this cloud of
this nasty process and concern. It seems like you
then were part of the cutting edge of the new
movement of redefining the planning process and
what planning is about. Because prior to, well,
the decade of the 70s, planning was largely
focused on land use planning. There's no question
about that. And it was all pretty physical. And
then with the discovery of the environment and so
forth, that was reiterated. But then we went on to
other things and redefining it as a management
tool. And it's interesting that you were here in
Austin carrying that word. at the very time that it
was being done all around the country, actually.
And so we weren't in any way lagging behind the rest
of the country at that point. In fact, probably we
were right at the cutting edge of it. I really
think, and I contribute a lot to the playing school
at A&M. I came out of the architecture program, so
therefore I was very much oriented toward the
physical view of things. Most of my coursework,
outside of the structure of the curriculum that I
had to take, was very much oriented in sociology.
Some of the business courses I took,
quite a few courses, philosophy and things like
that, took me really away from sort of that
physical thing. And it really had an impact on me.
some of the people politically were very much more
to the left of where I was. I grew up in East Texas,
very much conservative in political
perspective. I went to the core, was in
architecture school. And I remember taking a
course in my fifth year architecture school. And
some of the social principles and discussion that
were going on in those classes were just, blowing
my socks off. I mean, it really took me a while to
even be able to be in the same room with some of this
discussion going on. And while I look back now,
I've gained a lot in the social side of planning and
the human side of the issues in that experience.
And I think I've broadened tremendously in trying
see what planning or decision-making really does
to society. And I think it was one key value that I
got out of playing school, out of the whole thing. I
think it forced me, even though it was
uncomfortable, and I didn't really feel good
about a lot of things that went on in graduate
school, because I was being forced in all those
cases to go beyond where I was. And it was a forcing,
almost a two-year, very rigorous forcing
process. That's what we hope to do. Well, and being
at A&M, you'd never dream that that would happen. I
think you pressed a lot, Bob, as a person from
California and looking at where you had been. I
think McGraw and Gardner and a lot of those folks
were people that were really pushing us Yeah,
yeah. But I think it was valuable. I'm trying to
think of things that we might move into. One of the
first assignments I had down here was trying to
coordinate activities going on at the state
level. And the human service business, the
coordination of planning activities within each
state agency was one of the first assignments I
had. while having an architecture background,
having, you know, began some of this
acclimation, I might say, of this process, then to
have one of the first assignments is to deal with
human service agencies was a real challenge to me.
And I began getting into family planning kinds of
issues, began viewing health planning, what was
going on in health planning, What did our
human service agencies, what kinds of services
were being provided, what kind of services at the
health department? It really gave me a bath real
early of activities at the state level that I had
never been introduced to before. So I guess trying
to carry where we were back in the 69, 70 era, One of
the key things that were done is we passed a law that
created the governor as chief planning officer.
It said that the governor shall create
interagency planning councils to transcend
agencies and concerns. And I think that was when,
if you want to try to pull that up, it's Article
44.13.32a. And it is a state law that gives a basis
for the governor being involved in planning,
really. The law back in 69 and 70 talked more
extensively about interagency planning
councils, what they should be, and so forth. In 75,
the law was amended to be a little bit more general,
giving the governor some authorities in planning
expanded some roles, but really got a little bit
more general in the interagency council area. HUD
required each state to designate a state planning
officer, as I recall, for the transmittal of
monies and so forth to sign off on plans and
programs that would receive federal grants. And
most states, in fact, did specify the governor as a
state planning officer. But it didn't
necessarily follow them. I think that that
happened about the time that you're mentioning
here. About that same time, in 69, the
Intergovernmental Cooperation Act was passed.
It was passed actually in 67, I believe. The
Demonstration of Cities and Metropolitan Act was
passed in 64. And then the National Environmental
Policy Act was passed in 69. All three of those
laws, national laws, gave the grounding to trying
to create this review function of federal grants.
And that's really important. You know, that did
occur, and in 69, the division planning
coordination was designated as the
clearinghouse for federal grants. But I do not
know that I can verify that because of those
three federal acts and the old Circa 895 being
created by the Office of Management and Budget as
being a direct mandate for designating the
governor as chief planning officer. In fact, I
think the governor was actually designated prior
to that time. But it might have been the mood that
actually came. I think, in fact, that the governor
chief planning officer occurred in 67. But I would
need to check the actual date on when the law was
passed. But having the interagency planning
councils, Preston Smith began forming.
councils, particularly in the health area. As one
of my first areas, the Interagency Health and
Human Service Council at that time was a
coordinating group of about 18 to 20 human service
agencies. And the governor would call this
meeting of agency heads. Governor Smith would
always spend about 15 or 20 minutes opening the
session. He'd tend to leave. then the director of
the Division of Planning Coordination would be
the guy that pretty well ran the meeting. And we
have quite a bit of early work in coordinating the
planning efforts occurred through the
Interagency Planning Councils. That was the
Health and Human Service Council I mentioned.
There was one that... Does that still exist, the
Interagency Planning Council? No. Not that one.
There is a... When was that abandoned?
Okay. As governors came in, left and came in, there
tended to be, you know, an ending of that council
and a recreation of something.
Briscoe, Governor Briscoe began... sort of, let
me see how I can say it, he began becoming fairly
inactive personally as a governor in interagency
planning councils. While they continued to
function, his guy was a director of division
planning coordination, continued to call
meetings and to operate. When the governor didn't
come personally, agency commissioners began
dropping out, so they began to be slowly but
surely, without commissioners there, you lose
decision makers, and pretty soon you begin losing
effectiveness. So I think the latter part of the
Briscoe administration, I'd say 76, was probably
pretty much the end of the interagency councils in
that administration. That's really about three
years out of six that they continue to function and
operate. But a director of a division is actually
calling the meetings and setting up meetings and
so on. So Governor Clements then picked up on,
quote, the authority and created a group that they
were really the Big 12. And this is a
cross-functional group. This is natural
resource, human services. It was a group that
Governor Clements used as the group to initiate
and to operate the employee reduction programs,
the employee training programs.
I guess it was called Texas State Government
Effectiveness Program. And this council of the,
quote, big 12 state agencies were used as a forum
for the governor to kind of implement these
policies. Many of those policies directed
planning, impacted planning in a very direct way.
But it was not the same kind of functional planning
coordination work that went on in the early 70s
under the Preston Smith era, under the early days
of the Briscoe administration. Let me give you an
example of what I think you'll make a little bit
clearer.
This document I know, Bob, you have seen. It's a
document that was produced by the Interagency
Council on Natural Resources and the
Environment. It was a set of guidelines and
procedures for reviewing environmental impact
statements and for coordinating issues that were
interagency in nature. This document is really a
policy statement of the agencies directly
involved in natural resources. This was adopted
May of 75, but it You know, it is a statement. I think
if you go through here and read the policy, it's
called the Policy for the Environment. It's
actually a signed document saying this is what we
believe and what we would like to do in trying to
address environmental concerns. This was a far
reaching document at that time for us. fact that we
still look on it as a basis that we still refer to and
deal with because it was a policy statement. It did
talk about procedures. It has a statement on the
planning process. I'm sure Bob will really enjoy
critiquing. I know you've seen this, Bob. Haven't
you? Have you seen this document? I have. But it did
lay out what was perceived as the planning process
at that time in trying to make decisions about
whether to construct a state building or a highway
or a reservoir. This is the process that you go
through in trying to determine whether it's a good
decision or not. And I guess just to pass on to a
group of planners, this was done primarily
because the state agencies felt that if they
didn't take matters into their own hands, that the
feds were going to do it to them. And clearly, you
know, that was the underlying feeling throughout
this document. I'd like to say it was because we
wanted to do what was good for our state. And I guess
in a way, you know, you might say that might be a part
of a reason. But at any time or most of the time when
we had trouble getting some of these things
approved would say, well, you know, if we don't do
this, then this is going to happen. And it clearly
was a way of trying to get some key things done. But
this was a product of that council. And it was a
clear, I think, example of how a group of state
agencies with functional planning
responsibilities get together and try to solve an
issue that transcends each of the agencies. Yeah,
when would you say that went out of business, or it
hasn't? This council? Mm-hmm. OK. I mean, the
structure of it. The structure of the council
became
I'm trying to remember history. And if we get down
to specific, I'm sure the book will need to,
specifics and dates. I need to get with some
experts that might give me that. But this council
was actually transformed into a natural resource
council. They actually deleted the name. And
there was a state law that was passed that created a
natural resource council. After the natural
resource council was formed, Under whose
administration?
Well, basically, after Governor Briscoe stopped
meeting with this council and stopped, it was
obvious that there needed to be some other
vehicle. The state law was passed, which created
this Natural Resources Council. And then,
really, the major piece came about to create the
Texas Energy and Natural Resources Advisory
Council, the 10-rank. agency you need to pull that
law because that law really was the was the major
piece that transcended this council there were
some interim things between this and uh and that
agency but that agency was actually created uh
very late in briscoe administration i think
probably around uh just just trying to recall 78
probably 77 or 78 Did the membership stay the same?
No. See, when it was created as the Texas Energy and
Natural Resource Advisory Council, it did
change. We'd need to compare, but we could clearly
do that for you. I mean, the members are signatory
to this. And then the TNRAC agency. I think the
TNRAC agency began drawing in such entities as the
Attorney General's Office, some other people
that were directly concerned about energy that
were not a part of this entity. I think, for
example, the TNRAC, the co-chairmanship of TNRAC
was the governor and the lieutenant governor. The
lieutenant governor wasn't a part. See, the
legislative side, was not a part of this effort at
all. And then when we began having this new
creature of the TNRAC, we began seeing the
legislative side very much a predominant actor in
the thing. So I think as far as planning policy,
there are several things that we'd need to look at.
We'd need to track, see, this work of this council
went back to probably early 70s, 70, 71. There are
key people that I could identify that could give
you the nuts and bolts of what happened in the
beginning of 71, 72, depending on how far you feel
like you need to go. Joe Harris is one that I would
quickly refer you to as a key actor. and under
Preston Smith of the Interagency Natural
Resource Council, this long title. John Gosden
was a staffer under Joe Harris, and John's still
here, and could pass on some additional detail
about the Natural Resource Council.
The other kinds of councils that were formed
during those years, there was a transportation
council. And at that time, we had a separate mass
transportation agency. We had the Aeronautics
Commission. We had the Highway Department. We had
TTI over at A&M as a participant. The council over
at University of Texas dealing with
transportation was a participant. At that time,
because mass transit agency was separate, It
clearly needed to be a council of transportation
agencies to deal with issues. After, I don't know
what time in the 70s, but the Mass Transportation
Agency was transformed as a part of the Highway
Department. It became a little bit less of a reason
to try to coordinate because the agency was pretty
much a public transportation type agency. There
are still people over TTI that believe there needs
to be a transportation council to help coordinate
policy in the transportation business.
Who's on your faculty now? Virgil. Virgil's very
interested still in some form of a transportation
council that might be a forum for transportation
policy.
executive director of AIP, who then went to UMTA.
Who am I trying to recall? Well, he went from San
Diego, actually. But it doesn't matter. But at
that time, UMTA was very strong within DOT. And
they had quite a bit of money during that era. And I
think that that was one of the reasons why people
were getting pretty enthusiastic about forming
councils. Now, the money's sort of dried up.
Around 75 was the end of the Transportation
Council. And there's really nothing since then
that even looks like that. One thing I wanted to ask
you was, What was John Shanahan's role with state
planning?
John was before me. John, shortly after, or maybe
before I came on, John left. I see. John, I don't
even know that John was here any time that I was. A
very short time, if he was. I remember coming up as a
student and seeing where John was officed. on the
first floors of this building and meeting him
again. Of course, he was over at school in my early
years of planning school. But to my knowledge, I
really don't know where he left it and what role he
might have played in some of the goals for
programs. I think that would have been a
contribution if he did. I believe, as John will
tell us, One of the key things, my perspective was,
one of the key things that that division did, they
began looking at housing programs early on. That
was one of the early things that they were looking
at, partially maybe because of HUD funding. But I
think shortly after John left, one of the key
things that they did was begin developing a
housing program and housing planning function.
Well, the next person I wanted to ask you to comment
on is Mary Lou Henry and others who were involved in
the state's
review council to certify 701 planners. Okay. And
Texas was way ahead in most states in
providing some minimum level of guarantee to the
citizens responsible planning would take place
under the 701 program. OK. Let me plead ignorance a
little bit to this. From day one, my involvement,
701 planning, and that was one of the activities
that we were involved in when I first started. It
was a source of funding and developing an overall
program design for the office. and trying to
develop a planning framework and a set of goals and
objectives for the agency and so on. A piece of
funding came to the governor's office for
statewide planning and working with regional
councils and developing a regional planning
process. And the other piece went to the Texas
Department of Community Affairs after 1971,
after this agency was formed. And one of the first
roles they had was to allocate that planning money
out to communities across Texas for the local
planning function. So they became the
administering agency for that local pot of funds.
We continued through the years to work closely
with the Texas Department of Community Affairs.